Dr. Robert Chapman, December 4th, 1985. Okay. I
was a hospital commander at the NANG, the hospital
there, the Air Force Hospital. And in addition, we
had the 22nd Casualty Staging Flight, which was
responsible for air-backing everybody from the
Northern Theater out
in I-Corps.
At that time, I was not practicing as an
anesthesiologist, but I also have my boards in
aerospace medicine. And I was as much concerned
with the
medical, the total medical management,
everything from environmental medicine to the
air vac business, and this is why I spent a fair
amount of my time, not just in, just dealing with
patients who did that, too. Now,
what specific questions did you, do you have in
mind?
To begin with, if you could tell me how you got into
the military service. Well, I was a career
military officer. As a matter of fact, I retired
from the Air Force in 1978, but I came in under the
senior medical student program in 1958. I've
had a lot of experience with the Air Force. My dad
was a So Brown Shoe Army, 88 Air Force later became
the Air Force. So I grew up moving around from
pillar to post and all that sort of thing. I always
enjoyed flying. And so I got interested in the
military as a career.
Is that enough on that one? Mm-hmm. And what years
were you actually in Vietnam? I went to Vietnam in
1975.
One, 372, the time of the last big Tet Offensive.
Was it the case that with most doctors there just
for like a year at a time? I know all three of the
people I've interviewed have just been there a
year. That was the standard military tour, was a
year at a time. There were very few physicians that
went back for more than one tour. I can think of only
maybe one. There were other line officers who went
back for more than one, because at that time it was
the only war going, and they all thought it was a
great way to enhance their career, find new
combat. And you mentioned you were stationed in
Denain. What type of hospital? Was it one of the big
regional hospitals? No, this was a small base
hospital. We had two regional hospitals, the 95th
and back, which was an Army hospital about seven
miles away. And for a while we had a Navy hospital
ship that was right in Da Nang Harbor, but it moved
out just as I got there. So we basically, for our
neurosurgery and so forth, we had that. We had a
100-bed casualty staging unit, which received
casualties from all through I-Corps, from way on
south
down to almost to
about a third of the way down to Cameron. And the
casualties were, after they were processed, they
were processed through us, and then we, they were
vacuumed out. mostly to Clark, some to Cadena,
some
to Japan. And what rank did you achieve in the
North? I was a colonel. I was an lieutenant colonel
at the
time. How do you think the, what was the general
condition of the hospitals in Vietnam? The
hospitals we were in, much like Cameron, they were
prefabricated The equipment was pretty good, and
considering the shape of the rest of the buildings
in Vietnam, these hospitals were pretty good. We
went through a typhoon there that did some
significant amount of damage to our particular
building, but the
facilities there were not bad at all.
pleasant atmosphere to work in as pleasant as can
be considering the uh
there's no by no stretch of the imagination can you
be called pull over to some base where you're
restricted to the base because everything else is
you're running danger getting shot at being
rocketed three or four times a week i mean there's
no way you can make that pleasant but all things
considered um Compared with some of the other
places in Vietnam, it wasn't all that bad, except
maybe down around Saigon. We used to go down to
Saigon for R&R, to Cam Ranh, too. Cam Ranh was
relatively pleasant.
Have you ever watched MASH, the TV show? Yeah. How
did the situation there compare to life on MASH?
Well, MASH is a comedy show. And there are some
things, some of the little irritating things that
go on with the communications and problems with
headquarters sometimes and stuff like that. I
thought that, number one, I think the dedication
of the people that were there was very similar to
mine. But a lot of the tomfoolery didn't go on that
much. Reason I ask is that some of the people,
that's the only picture they get of what it was
like. They really believe it's all true.
How much combat danger was the hospital you were
in? Well,
significant. One Christmas party, we took some
people out to a perimeter gate and got sniped at.
Sniper fire was not at all unusual.
We had regular rocket attacks. The barracks right
across the street from the hospital was getting
destroyed, killed about 10 or 12 people, and
damaged a whole bunch of others. I had a one
122-millimeter rocket dutted right outside my
quarters. It was a good thing it dutted. It would
have blown my quarters to pieces. And we had fairly
regular amounts of damage from rocketry.
Was sanitation a problem?
Not on the base, per se, because we could control
that. Sanitation was a problem when you got off the
base. Of course, remember, Da Nang was one of the
larger French settlements, and at one time was a
very pleasant village, wonderful natural
resources. They had one area where there was a
beautiful beach, and the fishing was great. You
could catch a huge lot of shrimp and things like
this. We couldn't go down there and get them and eat
them because they were so contaminated with
hepatitis that you stood about a 50-50 chance
because most of the sewage effluent from the
sewage drained right out into the bay where the
shrimp people were doing all the fishing. So fresh
food from a Vietnamese standpoint was not really
obtainable. Some people ate it, sure, but it
wasn't saved.
Was the number of doctors and medics available
adequate for the number of casualties
encountered? For the most part, yeah. It's like
anything else. Casualties don't come in one at a
time. They come in in bunches of 50. And at that
time, you wished you had four or five more people.
But most of the time, as far as handling the base
support and so forth, we had an adequate staff.
How was the quality of that staff, the medical
personnel? They were very good. We had, in our
particular situation, and I'm going to consider
the Army too, They had two thoracic guys. They had
two neurosurgeons. They had ENT. They had
internal medicine and cardiology. They had a
dermatologist or two dermatologists and a large
selection of general surgeons and orthopedic
surgeons. Some of which were fully trained, board
eligible, and some of which were partially
trained. They came in on the very plan after they'd
done two or three years of their residency.
Our staff was primarily,
we had two partially trained general surgeons,
and the rest were general medical officers. And
they were primarily responsible for the care of
the base. The surgical problems and other things
went over to the Army, or when the Navy was there, to
the Navy. And we spent probably
most of our inpatient load was concerned with the
casualty staging.
Did you see a difference in quality between the
drafted doctors and the career doctors? Well, I
was the only career doctor, so it's hard to
compare. There were a few, few career doctors at
Cameron. There were very few at the Army, but
almost everybody there were either grafted or
came in under the very plan.
I remember at that time, military service was
and very poor repute. There was a lot of feeling,
you know, over here on the stateside against the
war. And, you know, it got, a couple of my doctors
told me when they went home they were, they didn't
put on their uniforms because people would accost
them and call them baby killers. You know, it was
really kind of nasty. So,
almost all of our people at that time were
people. What year did you actually enter the
service, did you say? I entered in 1958. You
entered in 1958. So you didn't really know
anything about what was happening in Vietnam
then, because it wasn't happening yet. No. My
first trip to Vietnam was in 1960. We went over
there on an exercise. It was kind of a show of force.
We went over to the Philippines. went over and
spent a couple of days in Saigon, which the first
time I was there, it was a beautiful city. And then
after the war started and things really got nasty,
when I was back in 71, it was amazing how much it had
changed. It was just a grubby, full of refugees and
shanty towns. It was just like a completely
different place. Do you think that... If you'd
have been 10 years later, becoming a doctor in
1968, would you think you would have joined the
Army, knowing what was happening in Vietnam?
Well, that's hard to say. I know it's
hypothetical. It's a very hypothetical
situation. You'd have to assume at the same time
that I'd have been 10 years younger. and probably
would have had a little more of the opinion that the
young people at that time had,
even in spite of the fact of having grown up in the
service.
I had a pretty good idea of what life was like, but I
enjoyed my service life. My wife and I both
thoroughly enjoyed it. Did you find adequate
medical supplies available to you in Vietnam?
For the most part, yeah. There were a few things
that we would run short of. Other supplies,
there's the standard everyday living. Sometimes
the VX was out of soap. Sometimes it was out of razor
blades. You couldn't get things like that from
time to time.
from medical supplies, we never really were
hurting, other than maybe it being short a day or
two because some supply flight from Cameron on to
our main warehouse and so forth was delayed. But we
traded back and forth with the Army quite a bit. If
they were out of something, we had it. We'd loan it
to them, and then they'd pay it back, and we'd
borrow something from them the next time. There
was a lot of that going on. How about blood? Was
there always plenty of it? Yeah, we had adequate
stores of blood. We had a blood bank, plus we had a
walking blood bank.
Being on an Air Force base, most of the people there
were service people in the standpoint, as opposed
to combat people.
And we had a rather large pool of bodies that we
could draw from if we needed blood, and we
occasionally would call on them. Was
all the advanced medical equipment that was
available in the United States, was that also
available to you over there?
Well, if you're talking about state-of-the-art
stuff, no, because we really didn't need it. We
weren't doing the kind of procedures that
demanded that sort of thing. We had adequate
anesthesia equipment, we had adequate surgical
equipment, but most of the stuff we were doing
in-country was a patch-up, do immediate repair,
and then send off to the medical centers,
sometimes in the States, sometimes to Clark or
Kadena, one of the larger offshore islands.
Kadena's in Okinawa, by the way. where they would
go through, and if they had a second surgical
procedure, or they had to recuperate, or they had
physical therapy, and all of the other things,
they were given there. And if they were reasonably
bad off, they went back to the States. I can't
remember one time I was going home on leave, and we
got the grand sum of two weeks leave the year we were
over there. And there was a kid who had a... a big
chunk of his skull removed, and it had the
neurosurgical procedures necessary to clean it
up and so forth. But he had to go back, and they had to
fit him with a titanium piece to put on it. And
because he had, in essence, an open wound, you
know, where the dural was sewed, or a synthetic
dural was put over it, the dural was gone, too. and
he had been cleared of his infections and so forth.
But because he was so sensitive, they wanted a
medical attendant. So I flew home with him as a
medical attendant on the aerobatic system. I took
him to Walter Reed, and then went from there on. But
there were a lot of patients that we had to send.
physicians with, or if we couldn't, if there
weren't any physicians available, many times
we'd send a nurse, a special nurse that sat there
and just took care of that patient. Because we'd
load these folks up in 141s, and, you know, you may
be carrying sometimes 130s, but you may be
carrying anywhere from 25 to 50 patients. There
was just a lot for the attendants there to do, so we
would frequently have to to send tenants along
with them. They were really seriously wounded.
What were the prevalent combat injuries you
encountered?
Well,
projectile wounds from shrapnel, bullets, wood,
what have you, claymore mines, this sort of thing,
were fairly common.
Also accidental wounds. We probably had almost as
many guys damaged by 151 jeeps rolling over. The
M151 is a good cross-country, rough terrain
vehicle, but it's not worth a damn on a highway
because it rolls very easily. And we had a bunch of
kids out there running around perimeter roads and
running around getting these highways that roll
the ditch. So we lost a lot of, had a lot of
casualties from that type of accident. We would
occasionally get some in from the Navy that had
been injured. They'd be air back to us on a
helicopter. And then we would put them on an
air-vac system to get them back to the States. But
it had injuries, industrial-type injuries,
catapult cables breaking and snapping, you know,
double amputees and that sort of thing, and this
sort of thing. It was kind of a dangerous life on the
carrier and on the flight deck. Yeah. And the usual
run of sicknesses, everything from leukemia to,
you know,
Everything that can happen in a non-wartime
population happens in the others, too.
What was the prevalent non-combat disease that
you saw? Well, the prevalent non-combat casualty
was from an accident. Disease-wise,
pneumonia and infection of various and sundry
types. uh you know boils and abrasions and things
that weren't properly taken care of on the field
that became infected and they get a cellulitis and
this sort of things but usually those we were able
to take care of in country um we had had several uh
kids with leukemia and uh various and some of the
other there was a couple of uh terrible carcinomas
of the testicles and things that you are fairly
common with young adult males.
What about venereal disease? I know that was a
problem. That was a big problem.
There was quite a lot of it. And of course, at that
time, the gonorrhea was very much penicillin
resistant. And it could be very difficult to
treat. And because our case-finding techniques,
these are usually coming from Vietnamese women,
and it was very difficult to track them down, to,
you know, to get them treated so that they wouldn't
re-infect with all the standard education things
and, you know, advice on prophylaxis and that sort
of stuff.
You know, it's a... I had one guy... asking him
where he got it and how he got it, and he got it
through a chain wire fence. This gal backed up to
the fence for a couple of yen there. He got his own
Elizabeth through the fence, and he got more than
he bargained for. And there was a lot of that sort of
stuff. The other big public health hazard we had
there were drugs.
We had a real problem, particularly with heroin.
We don't know that it's true for a fact, but we think
that it was being brought in and sold on the base as
being made in Cambodia. being brought in to the
base as a means of
kind of weakening the force. I mean, it was an
actual espionage type of thing. And you could buy
what in the States would be, you know, $100 worth of
stuff. You could buy it for five bucks, and you can
get it. There was no problem at all getting it, in
spite of all the shakedowns we had and getting all
the monosons and breaking them down and searching
and everything else. It's just, you know, the
human mind is too ingenious for us to keep from
hiding it. We had this one thing where there was a
deal called Golden Flow where everybody would
come in and would be told, you know, that they had to
report that time at that date, you know,
immediately. for a urine check, and we were
running the urines through spectrographic
analysis to see if anybody was on drugs. And
it was a real hassle. Of course, you weren't
probably aware of it at that time, but that was when
the drug culture was really coming on pretty
strong, and the hippies and the flower children
and all these folks. a very accepted form of
behavior in the young adults, particularly a lot
of those GIs, the soldiers, particularly the Army
types, were from poor ghetto-type families, and
they had probably been exposed to a considerable
amount of it. We had a real problem keeping drugs
from decreasing the combat readiness. We spent a
lot of time on it. How about drugs among the staff,
the medical staff, corpsmen and the nurses? Had
one nurse, a couple of corpsmen, no physicians
that I'm aware of. Anyway, and they all tested out
long. And most of the positions that, at least that
I had, and I can only speak from my facility,
positions we had were all pretty much straight
shooters, and they saw the problem for what it was.
Also, they were all from the South and from the
Midwest, where that culture hadn't really caught
on as strong, you know, as the California and the
East Coast types were more apt to have that kind of
thought. At least that was my experience.
Was there any problems with the addiction to the
pain reliever? No, we didn't have patients long
enough, really. I mean, if they were bad enough
where they needed, narcotic analgesics, they
were usually shipped out to Clark
or somewhere else. So we only used, you know, we're
talking about in our casualty staging unit, we
only kept them, the longest period of time was
about six days.
You mentioned infections a while ago. Was that a
major problem? Well, at that time, we had a pretty
good pretty good armamentarium with
antibiotics, so it wasn't a major problem. But we
did get some resistant organisms. And most combat
wounds are dirty wounds. Number one, when you've
been out grunging around in the mud for a while, and
haven't bathed in two or three weeks, other than a
quick dip in the polluting stream, maybe, and you
get a wound that penetrates and goes through
leather and cloth and skin and everything else and
deposits all this inside, chances of infection
are pretty high. But we didn't have nearly the
problem in the First World War, you know, getting
shot was almost a death sentence because of
infection.
We didn't have any real major problems from that
standpoint, just the occasional
antibiotic-resistant
holding. I know there was, like you said, a lot of
diseases that you'd catch at home that caught
there, too. Was there any... How much was the
disease due to the region they were in? We saw a lot
of amobiasis. We saw giardia. We saw...
very little in other than the echo virus and that
sort of thing. It usually went around just within
the military population.
Didn't, you know, the typhoid and typhus and all
the big epidemic things that were such problems in
the past we didn't have because we had excellent
immunization programs. People didn't come over
to that theater unless they were adequately
immunized against those diseases. So we had a full
global type thing, everything from smallpox to
typhus, typhoid,
If there was an immunization possible, everybody
over there had it. So there are immunizations. The
only patient I can recall that we had any real
problems with was a patient who came in with what we
thought was typhoid. And sure enough, he had
typhoid, but he also didn't have any white cells
because he was leukemia. So he had very
ineffective white cells. So he had, in essence,
had leukemia, which was undiagnosed. And got
challenged with a typhoid bug, came down with it,
just by virtue of having a defective aneurysm,
defective antibody system. What
percent, I guess, on the percentage of the
servicemen that were admitted to your hospital
for psychiatric reasons?
Well, we did not have a psychiatric section as
such. The psych patients were sent to over to the
9-5th where they had a closed ward holding type
thing. But I imagine But can we break this down into
major psychiatric? By this I mean psychosis,
major psychoneurosis,
probably less than 2%. But we did have some people
who came in with minor problems that they needed to
work out with psychosomatic illness. that sort of
thing, and that probably was more like about
10-15% of the patients we were treating. And
usually these responded to being able to sit down
and talk about their problems, and a lot of them
were problems from frustration because they were
having problems at home, or kids were doing
poorly, or they were sick, or the mama was running
around, or something like this, and they were
stuck there and they couldn't do anything about
it, and it was just a frustration phenomenon.
So they would come up with some of these other
things. Sometimes they'd have to get emergency
leaves or other types of ancillary support to kind
of help them over their little crisis, and then
they would come back and do a good job. I was more
interested in the number that were just going
crazy because of the situation, because of the war
situation. Completely went bonkers. Mm-hmm.
Probably of that,
I'd say less than one percent. I can only remember
one or two, one or two guys, and he was probably a
character and behavior disorder and not truly a
psychosis.
He took his commander at gunpoint, colandeered a
helicopter and flew down. And we went out and
talked with him, the base commander, and the wing
commander and I went out and we sat down and
negotiated with this guy and finally convinced
him to give up his gun. We sent him over to talk to the
shrinks, sent him back on a medical type thing. But
I'm not convinced that this was truly a psychosis.
I think he was a character behavior disorder. We
talked with his commander later. There had been a
problem, you know, and just all along, and ever
since he'd been in the service. Character and
behavior disorders were probably the major
psychiatric difficulty we ran into in the
service. Most of the guys, when they come in,
they're reasonably well-screened.
How high was the survival rate for a wounded
soldier? I thought it was very high. I couldn't
give you an exact statistic. If
a guy lived to make it to the back units, he probably
had a 99.9 chance of making it. What they were in the
combat aid stations and so forth, you know, the
guys that got hit by a Claymore mine and had holes in
everything they owned. These fellas had kept some
of them alive for a while, but a lot of them didn't
make it. There was no way they could have made it if
it hadn't on the front step of the biggest hospital
in the world.
What was the likely fate of an injured soldier?
Would the majority of them return to further
combat? Depends entirely on the injury. If a fella
had a minor wound, say just a a wound involving a
laceration or a simple break like a finger or a toe
or something that was not incapacitated, he'd be
sent back to Clark or someplace like this, allowed
to heal, and sent back to Vietnam. If it was
something that was more major, a broken femur or a
bad knee, injuries, other serious wounds,
intestinal wounds, and this sort of thing that
required prolonged things, they'd be sent back to
the States, and they were not sent back. Unless
they volunteered to come back. I think, as I
recall, the policy at that time was that if it was
going to take more time, or it was going to take six
months to rehabilitate them, and even though they
would be able to come back for six months, It was
better to get somebody who could come in for a whole
year. It was more economical.
So they usually didn't take these people. A lot of
these people were sitting there, and they'd be
wounded after they'd been in three or four months
or six months, and they wouldn't be back before the
tour was over anyway. So, of course, they didn't
come back.
You've mentioned AIRVAC a few times. Can you
elaborate on that a little bit and tell me how it
worked? Well, there were basically
three stages of AIRVAC. The first and probably the
most critical was run by the Army, and that's the
medivac system, the helicopters. And these were
medical service officers who flew the
helicopters with crews that were trained
specifically to take care and to pick up wounded.
and they would go out. They were in constant radio
contact, and they'd have one point where it was
kind of an assembling area, and they would ship
them out to pick up wounded wherever they might be,
because Vietnam was not so large. You weren't in
helicopter range or someplace. And they'd go out
and pick up the wounded in the helicopters, and
they were using
Hueys,
four or five wounded at the same time and it then
they would bring them back to uh depending
on the situation now right around us they brought
them right back to the 95th evac hospital but there
were some other hospitals smaller hospitals like
the mass units that were out in the fields further
south where they weren't quite so close they would
bring them back then where they would get their
immediate triage and and carried then they would
be aerovac uh from there uh if it was an isolated
army post by helicopter if it was they brought them
to one of the larger bases that had a landing strip
then they would fly by 130 back or long den or one of
the several large army hospitals and they would go
from there if further evacuation was warranted
then they would go from there through us, through
the casualty staging units, which were at, uh,
they had one at Cameron, they had one at Da Nang, and
they had one at, uh, at, uh, Saigon, at Townsend.
And these people would be processed through them,
and from there they would go to either Japan, uh,
Okinawa, or Clark, and then they would either stay
there overnight, or maybe for four or five days,
depending on their condition, and then they would
be put on a long haul and be brought back to the
States. So, you know, it would depend on the
nature of the wound and the nature of the problem as
to where they would stop in these intermediate
ways. You know, if a guy got a bullet that creased
his shoulder or a fragment tear or something on his
shoulder, he might go to the Italian aid station
and fix him up And that would be the minute of flying
back to his unit. That would be about all there
would be to it. But for the more seriously wounded,
it really, we had guys that were seriously wounded
and were back in the United States at a major
military hospital in four days.
So it's a good system. And that's with immediate,
that's with care and treatment and everything
along the way. That was one of the biggest
improvements made over the Korean War. Can you
think of any other improvements that were made in
the Vietnam War over the Korean?
Primarily, of course, we had a better selection of
antibiotics. During the Korean War, they had
penicillin, they had streptomycin, they had
sulfonyl. And that was essentially it. The later
part, then, they had some chloromycetins and
other things. We had a much more, much broader
spectrum of antibiotics. Korea, they were just
experimenting with vascular surgery. That's how
Denton Cooley and some of them got their start on
vascular surgery, carrying war injuries in
Korea. In Vietnam, vascular surgery was already
pretty far along, and there was a lot of things done
at the knife at the back and so forth. The major
vascular injuries were repaired by just, you
know, resecting the damaged artery and putting it
in the graft, and we didn't have that in Korea.
The systems were faster in Korea. If you were
wounded, they put you on a DC-3, a C-47, or a C-54,
lead you to Japan, which took about two or four
hours. And then from Japan back, it was almost all
reset-type airbag things or going back by ship. I
was middle of the ship. And so it was a long time
between the time you got there to where you were to
get definitive care in the final form. Whereas in
the Aerovac system with larger jet aircraft, they
would haul more and haul them a lot faster. As I
said, it was sometimes a matter of four days before
somebody was in the stateside hospital getting
that subspecialty super care that they needed.
I can't think of a great deal of warfare from the
standpoint of the guy in the trench. It hasn't
changed just a hell of a bunch.
Hearing it just a little bit further, can you think
of any lessons that were learned in medicine as a
result of Vietnam?
That's a pretty profound question. I don't know.
Maybe I didn't word it right. No. I think that you
worded it right, but it covers a multitude of
things. I think we learned that our Aerovac system
was a good system, and it could be refined maybe
even a little more. And we learned the importance
of maintaining an Aerovac system. From purely the
medical standpoint, the need for having
well-equipped, transportable, pre-assembled
hospitals, I think, was something that they
learned out of that, because it wasn't until well
along in the Vietnam War that they came up with
these things. They were going to have to kind of do
make do. That whole base went up in about two weeks,
and the hospital put it together in a couple of
days. But everything was pre-packed. They just
brought it off the ship, put it on the barge, hauled
it up to the crane, put it in, and dropped it in
place. And they hooked them all together like a
giant tinker toy. And so they did come up with that
lesson, the importance of having these things
that rapidly able to be moved and put up in place,
and if necessary, torn down and taken someplace
else. The necessity for the immunization
procedures was
well proven in World War II, and that wasn't
exactly a new lesson. It was just like many things,
one of the things we had to relearn.
The real basic question is that war is hell and it
doesn't make any difference how well you're
equipped and everything, that there are a lot of
people suffering and a lot of people dying. It's
best to avoid one if you can. I think that's kind of a
general summation of
it.
Someone mentioned that intensive care units in
hospitals were improved. That's not fact-based.
What do you think about that? Yeah, they are. The
intensive care equipment
that we have, and a lot of the procedures, too, have
changed since then.
We still had a one-on-one nurse, and a good, smart
intensive care nurse doesn't need a whole bunch of
stuff to tell her that the patient's good or the
patient's going bad. I'm a firm believer in
looking at folks, you know. And the
sophistication of today, you know, where you can
hook a guy up to an automatic blood pressure
impulse and all this stuff and have it all read out
in a purized area means that, you know, you can kind
of divvy up the workload. I don't really know, with
the exception of some of the newer drugs that we
have, We do any better job now in intensive care
than we did then. Just our basic equipment is
easier to use. It's a little more reliable. But
when it comes down to the one-on-one of a nurse and a
patient and a physician taking care of them, I just
don't know that we do any better now than we did
then. I've done a lot of reading on this, on some of
the statistics and stuff in Vietnam. The majority
of the deaths resulted from injuries to the face
and neck region. Can you think of any way that can be
prevented or some kind of a... Well, the reason
that's true, if you think about combat and what
happens to a guy, number one, he's wearing a flak
jacket. Most of them had on flak jackets. So the
thorax is pretty well protected and they're
hiding in a hole and what's exposed the head and the
shoulder that's why most of the injuries are based
on that all right one other thing that crossed my
mind when i was reading all this most of the death
like you said if they got to the hospital they
usually survived so most of the deaths were due to
if the helicopters can get in there quick enough
are Well, I'm sure there were some of that. Most of
the deaths were because they were so badly damaged
that they couldn't survive no matter where they
were. I think
if they received what I would call a non-lethal
injury, something that wasn't going to kill them
regardless, their chances of survival were
pretty good. But if you've ever seen anybody who's
been hit by an AK-47 about six times, or has been
blown up by a Claymore mine, there's very damn
little anybody can do for them. And they may still
be alive, but not for long. And it doesn't make any
difference where they are. So even if their buddy
next to them was trained in first aid, that's what I
was thinking. Why didn't their soldier be trained
in first aid? The soldier was trained in first aid.
They were? Sure. They had corpsmen right there
with them all the time who were really, some of
those corpsmen were really sharp. And they got to
do damn good. But every GI going through training
who received first aid, he knew how to do a, or was
told, he maybe didn't know how, but they knew how to
do tracheostomy. They could patch up a sucking
chest wound. And they carried their first aid kits
with them. Now, they were exposed to the training.
Not all of them paid any attention. That's true.
But for the most part, the basic simple things that
could be done in the field were done by the not by the
by the medics necessarily by the corpsmen but by
the other soldiers